# Wayland Server

The files here implement the different wayland protocols we
support. Usually the filename is a shortened version of the protocol
name.

## Design

In wayland, code for interacting with the protocol is generated by the
`wayland-scanner` program. Code for the core wayland protocols is
contained in `libwayland.so`, but for independent protocols we need to
generate the code ourselves. This takes place in our `build.rs`, which
generates code in the `protocol` directory. Generated code is named
`*_generated.rs`. It is then wrapped in a similarly named (but not
autogenerated) file which is advertised as a module. See `build.rs`
for more.

Our wayland singleton and globals are created in the `compositor.rs`
file. Effectively, that is the "main" file in this directory. The
wayland compositor, registry, and display are created, then a global
object advertising each supported protocol is registered.

All resources are kept in an entity-component set called the
`Atmosphere`. The atmosphere assigns an id to wayland surfaces and
wayland clients (WindowId/ClientId). This id can be used to look up
properties about that object that are stored in the atmosphere. Most
protocol implementations have a pointer to the global atmosphere that
they will update. Other subsystems can then see the changes that the
protocol handler has made and react accordingly.

## Wayland api

Wayland is very callback-driven, so we create a series of handlers
that react to requests from clients and update our compositor's
state. This is done using our wayland wrapper: the wayland-server
crate (which is part of the smithay project).

Category5 does not use a high level wayland library such as wlroots or
smithay for a few reasons:
* It reduces the dependency count.
* One of our primary goals is to create a system which is easy to read
and hack on. Having the code be half wlroots and half category5 would
increase the code (and languages) that a new developer must read, and
means that changes have to be contributed to multiple places.
* To give category5 more control over itself. We are isolated from the
changes in the smithay/wlroots ecosystems. We can choose how we
implement every last detail.

wayland-server provides enough of a wrapper around the wayland api to
make programming easy, but not so much that it gets in our way.
